## U.S. Industries Most Affected by Covid-19 and Their Recovery, from an Employment Perspective


    The Covid-19 pandemic triggered economic recessions and job crises globally and in the U.S. Using survey data acquired from the Census Bureau and Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), we examine the U.S. unemployment rate and related issues by industry and industry sector. We found that accommodation, arts and entertainment, food and drink services industries are most heavily hit by the pandemic and recover from the impact relatively slowly. Also, industries that are most affected by the pandemic tend to have lower median hourly wages than the national median, suggesting that the pandemic disproportionately affects the lower-income population. Policy makers can design policies that address issues of unemployment and labor force participation by providing assistance and incentives to businesses in heavily hit industries. 

### Background and Current Context
    The Covid-19 pandemic has set off one of the worst labor and job crises since the Great Depression. Research has found that the job disruption disproportionately affects lower-income households, women and racial minorities; increases poverty and widens income inequalities (Pew Research Center, 2021). The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development also warns about the large amount of permanent job losses and the potential social crisis (OECD, 2021).

<iframe src="image/1_stack_area.html" height="600" width="1000"></iframe>

    The plots above visualize the percentage of the population that are not in the labor force, unemployed, and employed between January 2020 to November 2021. It also shows the sharp increase of the national unemployment rate in April of 2020, and the decreasing trend henceforth with occasional upticks. The preliminary data from BLS shows that the unemployment rate dropped to 4.2% in November 2021, though still higher than the pre-Covid level.  The recovery of labor force participation is slower, only recovering half of the loss in participation rate since February 2020. Researchers pointed out that the decline in unemployment rate partially stemmed from the fact that some people stopped looking for work, and thus are not counted as unemployed (Politico, 2021). According to the Pew Research Center, the decline in labor force participation amid the pandemic indicates that the official unemployment rate underestimates the share of the population who are jobless (2020).  
    Besides the ubiquitous layoffs and wage decline at the onset of the pandemic, workers in different industries and sectors are impacted to varying degrees. Also, shifts in consumer demand and business practices driven by the pandemic lead to permanent job losses and long-term market restructuring. Therefore, industries are recovering from the recession at varying rates.  This article examines the unemployment data overtime to find the hardest-hit industries and sectors and identify their recovery patterns. 
    The plot below visualizes the industry sectors in the US and their relative size in terms of employment level. The data is from 2019, which is the latest detailed estimate available. Certain sectors can be narrowed down further past what is presented by this initial plot. You can click into these categories to see their subcategories!

<iframe src="image/2_treemap.html" height="700" width="900"></iframe>

### Data and Description of Analysis 

    The goal of this analysis is to identify industries and sectors most affected by Covid-19. We focus on labor statistics, including unemployment rates and median wage across industries. Industries’ contributions to GDP and their financial data, e.g., assets, net income, are not within the scope of this analysis. We use data from 22 iterations of the Current Population Survey collected jointly by the Census Bureau and BLS, fielded monthly from February 2020 to November 2021. After removing responses containing “No answer” in employment status and industry field, each individual survey has more than 50 thousand observations. The rationale behind choosing this timeframe is that February 2020 can represent the most recent pre-pandemic levels for employment data, and November 2021 is the latest data available.
    Additionally, the industry monthly employment level comes from the BLA’s Current Employment Statistics. The wage data is taken from BLS’s May 2020 National Industry-Specific Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates, which is the latest comprehensive wage statistics. This analysis also uses job listing data collected by the Greenwich.HR. 

### Key Findings 
#### 1. Covid-inflicted Recession and Varying Impacts

<iframe src="image/3_lineplot.html" height="700" width="1000"></iframe>

    The plot above presents the post-Covid unemployment rate by industry. Each industry sector is denoted by a different color. You can see the industry and statistics by hovering your cursor on the lines, or clicking on the dropdown menu to view the line chart for a specific industry by itself. You can also adjust the bar beneath the line chart to focus on to home in on more minute changes.
    As can be seen from the plot, most industries peaked in unemployment in April 2020, and began recovering at various rates. We observe that accommodation (e.g. hotels), arts and entertainment (e.g. theaters, museums), personal and laundry services, food and drink services (e.g. restaurants) industries are most heavily hit by the pandemic, with unemployment rates of 42.92%, 38.32%, 37.1%, and 32.9% respectively. Following them are motion picture and sound recording, rental and leasing services, transportation equipment manufacturing, social assistance services (e.g. child day care, elderly care), retail trade, administrative/support services (e.g. facilities support, travel agency), and transportation and warehousing (e.g. airlines, railways, warehouses). On the other end of the spectrum, some industries show resilience to the pandemic from an employment perspective. For instance, professional, scientific, and technical services (legal services, accounting services, scientific research and development, etc.), public administration, finance and insurance, computer and electronic product manufacturing, remained at an employment rate of 5% and below in April and May 2020. We can observe the immediate impact of the pandemic and social distancing policies on industries with strong in-person service elements and are unable to easily transition to remote work.
    The following bubble plot is used to visualize the post-Covid unemployment rates of various industries compared to their median wage. The slider beneath the plot can be adjusted from February 2020 to November 2021, which will shift the plot to visualize the data at that point in time. You can also press the triangle sign next to the slider to see an animated view of the changes. Homing in on April and May 2020, we can observe that the industries with higher unemployment rates tend to have lower median wages, the four industries that are color-coded on the plot are examples. We can observe a weak negative correlation between the wage and unemployment. This result suggests that the pandemic disproportionately affects lower-waged occupations and lower-income populations.
    The size of the bubbles represents the number of respondents in the BLS’s Current Population Survey who are employed in the industry. The survey does not provide industry-specific weights to responses. But since the sample size is sufficiently large, the number of respondents is indicative of the employment levels of these industries.

<iframe src="image/4_bubble.html" height="600" width="900"></iframe>

#### 2. Varying speed of recovery 
    The table below shows a ranking of industries based on the surges in their unemployment rate from February 2020 to May 2020. The reason that I chose May 2020 is that it is one quarter apart from our pre-Covid baseline (February 2020), when the pandemic intensified, and social distancing was implemented in the majority of the states. It is useful to measure the shock of the pandemic.

<iframe src="image/3.5_table.html" height="500" width="500"></iframe>

    Now let’s look at the recovery of different industries. The plot below displays the comparison between the unemployment rates in February 2020 and in February 2021 across industries that we identify as most affected by Covid-19 in the early months. Since February 2021 is one year apart from the pre-Covid baseline, it facilitates year-on-year comparisons and circumvents the effect of seasonality of certain industries. We see that while industries like accommodation, art and entertainment, and food services remained at a high rate of unemployment compared to their pre-Covid levels, transportation equipment manufacturing, retail trade, and social assistance industries have moved closer to their respective pre-Covid unemployment rates. This shows that certain industries, despite being hit heavily at the onset of the pandemic, are more resilient and recovering from the shutdowns and recession faster. While for other industries, the negative impact of the pandemic is relatively long-term. 
    The national median hourly wage estimate cross-industry and cross-occupation in May 2020 is $20.17. We consider industries with median hourly wages lower than $20.17 in May 2020 as lower-waged. Again, we observe significant overlaps between lower-wage industries and industries most affected by the pandemic. 

<iframe src="image/5_dumbbell.html" height="600" width="900"></iframe>

    The plot below presents the net job loss from February to April 2020 alongside the job gain from April 2020 to November 2021. Despite that it has been one year and a half since the Covid-inflicted recession, most of the industries (except financial activities) are still not fully recovered from the job loss during the first months of the pandemic. Noticeably, entertainment and hospitality (again) has a larger gap to fill, and governments, after experiencing significant job loss, have had very little job gain in the past 19 months. 

<iframe src="image/6_jobloss_barplot.html" height="900" width="1100"></iframe>

    The graph below displays the trend of job openings from February 2020 to February 2021 in four industries that we identify as heavily affected by the pandemic. The number of job listings is normalized to the pre-Covid levels. It shows that the volume of listings for all four industries spiked around January and August 2021. Job listings in both retail and transportation industries began picking up as early as July 2020 and hovered around pre-Covid levels, before dipping again in December 2020 and July 2021, and spiking in January and August 2021. It seems to show that retail and transportation industries’ demand for employees is seasonal and cyclical, but it recovers from the pandemic relatively fast. 
    On the other hand, entertainment and hospitality job listings followed a similar trend, dropping low during April, hovering at around half of the pre-Covid levels before peaking in January 2021, and then falling back just below the baseline with a slight trend upwards. Hospitality’s job listings surged to quadruple that of the pre-Covid level in August 2021, while entertainment’s labor demand also increased to twice the pre-Covid level. All industries steadily stayed above pre-covid levels afterward. Measuring by the amount of job openings, retail and transportation industries recover better than the entertainment and hospitality industries for the most of the past year, which is likely because retail and transportation are necessities, while demand for entertainment and hospitality services are more elastic. 
    
<iframe src="image/7_listing_areaplot.html" height="600" width="800"></iframe>

### Implications and Recommendations 
    While the unemployment rate has dropped significantly since the peak in April 2020, it has yet to return to the levels before the pandemic. Industries like hospitality (Accommodation & Food and drink services) and arts and entertainment are in a slower recovery process. Also, the small-business share of the sector GDP for both arts and entertainment, and accommodation and food services are more than 50% (McKinsey & Company, 2020). These two industries may benefit the most from state and federal level support. As both Democrats and Republicans express concern about the current unemployment rates, policy makers can look to adjust and create policies in line with the agendas of both parties. Many Democrats attribute unemployment issues to inadequate compensation and benefits provided by employers, while many Republicans assert that it is caused by overly charitable unemployment benefits on both the state and federal level (Cornwell et al., 2021). Knowing this, instead of providing additional benefits to the unemployed, policy makers could shift their focus to assist small businesses in heavily impacted industries in providing benefits and better pay for their employees. Grants can be provided to startups and organizations that are looking to create new sustainable jobs in their industry space that have potential for growth. 
    It is essential to restructure a more resilient labor market for future generations that can withstand future crises. Many companies in the entertainment, food and beverage, and retail industries have had great successes with transitions to partial or full-time remote work for many integral roles (Porter, 2021). Policy makers can take note of the successful shift towards remote work and support industries that were heavily impacted by Covid-19 in doing the same.
    Still, many roles in the hospitality and transportation industries cannot become completely remote due to the nature of the jobs. These industries may benefit from improved infrastructure around safety in the work environment, healthcare, and employment benefits. Policy makers can look into incentivizing companies to improve employee benefits via subsidies and tax breaks.
    
### Data Sources:
- U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), Current Population Survey (CPS), Feb 2020, May 2020, Feb 2021, retrieved from https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cps.html. 
- U.S. Census Bureau, Industry by Occupation, 2019 American Community Survey (ACS) 1-Year Estimates, retrieved  from https://data.census.gov/cedsci/table?q=industry%20by%20occupation&d=ACS%201-Year%20Estimates%20Detailed%20Tables&tid=ACSDT1Y2019.B24050.  
- U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), Labor Force Statistics including the National Unemployment Rate, Unemployment Rate - LNS14000000, Civilian Labor Force Participation Rate - LNS11300000, retrieved from https://www.bls.gov/data/#unemployment. 
- U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), May 2020 National Industry-Specific Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates, retrieved from https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oessrci.htm. 
- U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), Current Employment Statistics - CES (National), retrieved from https://www.bls.gov/ces/data/. 
- Greenwich.HR, Covid Job Impacts - US Hiring Data Since March 1 2020,  retrieved from AWS Open Data Registry https://registry.opendata.aws/us-hiring-rates-pandemic/.

### References: 
- Kim Parker, Juliana Menasce Horowitz, and Anna Brown, “About Half of Lower-Income Americans Report Household Job or Wage Loss Due to COVID-19”, Pew Research Center, April 21, 2020, retrieved from https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2020/04/21/about-half-of-lower-income-americans-report-household-job-or-wage-loss-due-to-covid-19/.  
- Rakesh Kochhar and Jesse Bennett, “U.S. labor market inches back from the COVID-19 shock, but recovery is far from complete”, Pew Research Center, April 14, 2021, retrieved from https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/04/14/u-s-labor-market-inches-back-from-the-covid-19-shock-but-recovery-is-far-from-complete/. 
- Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “The impact of COVID-19 on employment and jobs”, OECD.org, retrieved from https://www.oecd.org/employment/covid-19.htm. 
- “U.S. unemployment claims fall to lowest level since pandemic” Politico, October 14, 2021, retrieved from https://www.politico.com/news/2021/10/14/unemployment-claims-lowest-level-515984. 
- McKinsey & Company, “COVID-19 recovery in hardest-hit sectors could take more than 5 years”, July 29, 2020, retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/coronavirus-leading-through-the-crisis/charting-the-path-to-the-next-normal/covid-19-recovery-in-hardest-hit-sectors-could-take-more-than-5-years. 
- Susan Cornwell, David Morgan, Heather Timmons, and Paul Simao “After shock U.S. jobs data, Republicans and Democrats spar over benefits.” Reuters, May 7, 2021, retrieved from https://www.reuters.com/business/after-shock-us-jobs-data-republicans-democrats-spar-over-unemployment-benefits-2021-05-07/
- Eduardo Porter, “The Work-From-Home Economy and the Urban Job Outlook.” The New York Times, Sept 3, 2021, retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/03/business/economy/covid-urban-service-economy.html. 

